=encoding UTF-8

=head1 NAME

PAGI::Building - building frameworks and toolkits on PAGI

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This guide is for people building a B<layer> on PAGI: a web framework, a
toolkit, an application harness. Where L<PAGI::PSGI> is about bringing your code
I<to> PAGI, this is about building I<on> it.

The thesis is short. A PAGI application is just:

    async sub {
        my ($scope, $receive, $send) = @_;
        ...
    }

Everything a framework provides -- routing, middleware, request and response
objects, content negotiation, sessions -- is an B<optional> layer over that one
small contract. The contract is stable (see the stability notice in L<PAGI>),
so a framework built on it does not have to chase a moving target, and an
application written against your framework runs unchanged on any conforming
server.

=head1 THE LAYERING MODEL

A framework is not a different kind of thing from a raw PAGI application; it is a
stack of conveniences over the same C<$scope>/C<$receive>/C<$send>. It helps to
see the layers as separable, because you can write your own, borrow ready-made
ones from the C<PAGI-Tools> distribution, or mix the two:

=over 4

=item B<Dispatch / routing>

Map an incoming request (method and path, the scope type) to a handler.
F<examples/mini-framework> is a complete worked example -- routing with path
parameters and async dispatch in about fifty lines. The production version is
L<PAGI::App::Router>.

=item B<Request and response ergonomics>

Hand the user a request object instead of a raw C<$scope>, and a response
builder instead of hand-written C<http.response.start>/C<http.response.body>
events. See L<PAGI::Request> and L<PAGI::Response>.

=item B<Middleware>

A wrapping layer around the application -- see L</MIDDLEWARE> below. The
C<PAGI::Middleware::*> suite ships ready-made ones (CORS, sessions, gzip, auth,
rate limiting, and more).

=item B<Everything else>

Error handling, content negotiation, body parsing, cookies, sessions: each is
another small layer over the protocol, not a reimplementation of it.

=back

The point is that you never reimplement the protocol. You add conveniences, and
you choose how many.

=head1 MIDDLEWARE

A middleware is a function that takes the inner application (an C<async sub>) and
returns a new one. The new wrapper can adjust C<$scope> before calling inner,
wrap C<$send> (or C<$receive>) to observe or rewrite events, short-circuit by
responding without calling inner at all, or do work before and after.

A complete example that stamps each request with an id -- making it visible to
inner handlers via the scope, and to the client via a response header:

    sub with_request_id {
        my ($app) = @_;
        my $counter = 0;

        return async sub {
            my ($scope, $receive, $send) = @_;

            my $id = ++$counter;
            $scope->{'myapp.request_id'} = $id;   # inner handlers can read this

            my $wrapped_send = async sub {
                my ($event) = @_;
                if ($event->{type} eq 'http.response.start') {
                    push @{ $event->{headers} }, [ 'x-request-id', $id ];
                }
                return await $send->($event);
            };

            return await $app->($scope, $receive, $wrapped_send);
        };
    }

To short-circuit -- an authentication gate, say -- a middleware simply sends its
own response and returns without ever calling C<$app>. This is the same shape as
PSGI middleware, one level asynchronous; if you have written PSGI middleware,
you already know how to write this.

=head1 EXTENDING THE PROTOCOL

PAGI is deliberately small, but it is not closed. A framework can define its own
events and scope conventions:

=over 4

=item *

B<New protocol events or scope types> (a capability like C<http.fullflush>, or a
whole new protocol) are defined through the extension mechanism and require a
cooperating server. See L<PAGI::Spec::Extensions>.

=item *

B<Your own asynchronous events> -- timers, background jobs, external triggers --
require no server cooperation at all. You model them as L<Future>s and compose
them with the protocol's events, loop-agnostically. This is covered in
L<PAGI::Spec::Extensions/"Defining your own events">, and it is the capability
that lets a framework offer genuinely event-driven features without binding
itself to one event loop.

=item *

B<Scope keys> under your own namespace (C<< $scope->{'myapp.session'} >>) are how
middleware passes data down to handlers -- the equivalent of stashing in
C<< $env >>.

=back

=head1 PATTERNS WORTH KNOWING

Two asynchronous footguns are worth designing away I<for your users>, so they
do not have to think about them:

=over 4

=item *

B<Orphaned response Futures.> If a user forgets to C<await> a C<$send>, the
application's Future can resolve before the send actually completes. A framework
can prevent this entirely by routing all output through a response object that
collects every send Future and awaits them together when the handler finishes.

=item *

B<Orphaned background Futures.> A background task whose Future nobody holds can
fail silently or outlive the request. A framework that participates in the
server's loop (for example by being an L<IO::Async::Notifier> and adopting its
Futures) can surface those errors and shut the work down coherently.

=back

These are design directions, not prescriptions -- but solving them is a large
part of what turns "a few conveniences" into a framework people trust.

=head1 SEE ALSO

=over 4

=item L<PAGI::PSGI> - coming to PAGI from PSGI

=item L<PAGI::Tutorial> - the protocol, taught from scratch

=item L<PAGI::Cookbook> - worked, runnable recipes

=item L<PAGI::Spec> - the specification

=item L<PAGI::Spec::Extensions> - the extension mechanism and custom events

=back

And F<examples/mini-framework> for a complete framework in about fifty lines.

=head1 AUTHOR

John Napiorkowski E<lt>jjnapiork@cpan.orgE<gt>

=head1 COPYRIGHT AND LICENSE

This software is licensed under the same terms as Perl itself.

=cut
