=encoding UTF-8

=head1 NAME

PAGI::Cookbook - worked, runnable recipes for the PAGI protocol

=head1 DESCRIPTION

A gallery of short, self-contained recipes for "how do I do X in PAGI?", each
with the key code inline. Where L<PAGI::Tutorial> teaches the protocol as a
linear path, the cookbook is for dipping in.

Every recipe corresponds to a complete, runnable application under the
distribution's F<examples/> directory. They are all B<raw PAGI> -- a single
C<async sub> over C<$scope>, C<$receive>, and C<$send>, with no helper modules
-- so what you see is the protocol itself, not a framework on top of it.

=head2 Running a recipe

You need a PAGI server. These instructions use C<pagi-server> from the
C<PAGI-Server> distribution; any conforming server works:

    pagi-server --app examples/01-hello-http/app.pl --port 5000

Each example has its own F<README.md> with a fuller description.

=head1 START HERE: A FRAMEWORK ON PAGI

I<Example: F<examples/mini-framework>>

The best way to understand PAGI's value is to see how little stands between the
protocol and a real web framework. C<Nano> -- routing, path parameters, and
genuinely non-blocking async dispatch -- is about B<forty lines> over raw PAGI:

    my $app = Nano->new;

    $app->get('/hello/:name' => sub ($req) {
        "Hello, $req->{params}{name}!\n";
    });

    # An async handler awaits slow work without blocking other requests:
    $app->get('/slow/:secs' => async sub ($req) {
        await Future::IO->sleep( $req->{params}{secs} );
        "Done.\n";
    });

The application above never touches the protocol; the framework hides it. Read
F<examples/mini-framework/README.md> for the full walkthrough -- it is the
single best argument for building on PAGI.

=head1 HTTP

=head2 Hello, HTTP

I<Example: F<examples/01-hello-http>>

Every HTTP response is one C<http.response.start> event followed by one or more
C<http.response.body> events. C<< more => 0 >> marks the final body chunk:

    await $send->({
        type    => 'http.response.start',
        status  => 200,
        headers => [ [ 'content-type', 'text/plain' ] ],
    });

    await $send->({
        type => 'http.response.body',
        body => 'Hello from PAGI',
        more => 0,
    });

Header names are lower-case, and bodies are bytes -- encode text yourself (see
L</UTF-8 round trips>).

=head2 Reading a request body

I<Example: F<examples/03-request-body>>

The request body arrives as a stream of C<http.request> events. Keep calling
C<$receive> until one has C<< more >> false:

    my $body = '';
    while (1) {
        my $event = await $receive->();
        last if $event->{type} ne 'http.request';
        $body .= $event->{body} // '';
        last unless $event->{more};
    }

The bytes are raw and undecoded; the application decides how to interpret them.
Even if you do not need the body, you should drain it before responding.

=head2 Streaming a response

I<Example: F<examples/02-streaming-response>>

To stream, send several C<http.response.body> events with C<< more => 1 >> and a
final one with C<< more => 0 >>. Declaring C<< trailers => 1 >> on the start
event lets you finish with an C<http.response.trailers> event:

    await $send->({
        type     => 'http.response.start',
        status   => 200,
        headers  => [ [ 'content-type', 'text/plain' ] ],
        trailers => 1,
    });

    for my $i (0 .. $#chunks) {
        my $more = ($i < $#chunks) ? 1 : 0;
        await $send->({ type => 'http.response.body', body => $chunks[$i], more => $more });
        await Future::IO->sleep(1) if $more;
    }

    await $send->({ type => 'http.response.trailers', headers => [ [ 'x-done', '1' ] ] });

The example also keeps a C<$receive> Future pending and checks
C<< $disconnect->is_ready >> between chunks, so it stops early if the client
goes away.

=head2 UTF-8 round trips

I<Example: F<examples/12-utf8>>

PAGI is precise about where text is decoded for you and where you get raw
bytes:

    # $scope->{path} is already UTF-8-decoded per the spec.
    # query_string and the body are raw bytes -- percent-decode, then decode:
    $str =~ s/%([0-9A-Fa-f]{2})/chr hex $1/eg;
    my $text = decode_utf8($str);

    # Responses go out as bytes, and Content-Length is the BYTE count:
    my $bytes = encode_utf8($html);
    await $send->({
        type    => 'http.response.start',
        status  => 200,
        headers => [
            [ 'content-type',   'text/html; charset=utf-8' ],
            [ 'content-length', length $bytes ],
        ],
    });
    await $send->({ type => 'http.response.body', body => $bytes, more => 0 });

The running example echoes Greek, CJK, emoji, and accented input back through
the path, query string, and a form body. See the UTF-8 sections of
L<PAGI::Spec::Www> and L<PAGI> for the full rules.

=head1 WEBSOCKET

=head2 Echo server

I<Example: F<examples/04-websocket-echo>>

A WebSocket scope opens with a C<websocket.connect> event that you answer with
C<websocket.accept>; then you loop, receiving C<websocket.receive> frames and
sending C<websocket.send>, until C<websocket.disconnect>:

    my $event = await $receive->();              # websocket.connect
    await $send->({ type => 'websocket.accept' });

    while (1) {
        my $frame = await $receive->();
        if ($frame->{type} eq 'websocket.receive') {
            # $frame->{text} for text frames, $frame->{bytes} for binary
            await $send->({ type => 'websocket.send', text => "echo: $frame->{text}" });
        }
        elsif ($frame->{type} eq 'websocket.disconnect') {
            last;
        }
    }

Unlike HTTP, a WebSocket scope is long-lived: one scope spans the whole
connection.

=head1 SERVER-SENT EVENTS

=head2 Broadcasting events

I<Example: F<examples/05-sse-broadcaster>>

Open the stream with C<sse.start>, then push C<sse.send> events. Watch
C<$receive> for C<sse.disconnect> so you stop when the client closes:

    await $send->({
        type    => 'sse.start',
        status  => 200,
        headers => [ [ 'content-type', 'text/event-stream' ] ],
    });

    for my $msg (@events) {
        last if $disconnect->is_ready;
        await Future::IO->sleep(1);
        await $send->({ type => 'sse.send', event => $msg->{event}, data => $msg->{data} });
    }

Using C<< Future::IO->sleep >> rather than C<sleep> keeps the handler
non-blocking and loop-agnostic.

=head1 APPLICATION LIFECYCLE

=head2 Lifespan and shared state

I<Example: F<examples/06-lifespan-state>>

The C<lifespan> scope runs once per process, around startup and shutdown. Reply
to each event, and use it to build state that later requests share via
C<< $scope->{state} >>:

    if ($event->{type} eq 'lifespan.startup') {
        $state->{greeting} = 'Hello from lifespan';
        await $send->({ type => 'lifespan.startup.complete' });
    }
    elsif ($event->{type} eq 'lifespan.shutdown') {
        await $send->({ type => 'lifespan.shutdown.complete' });
        last;
    }

Not every server or run drives lifespan, so an app should still work when the
startup event never arrives. See L<PAGI::Spec::Lifespan>.

=head1 SERVER EXTENSIONS

=head2 Forcing a flush: the fullflush extension

I<Example: F<examples/07-extension-fullflush>>

Servers advertise optional capabilities in C<< $scope->{extensions} >>. Always
check for one before using it. C<fullflush> pushes buffered bytes to the client
immediately:

    my $supports_fullflush = exists $scope->{extensions}{fullflush};

    await $send->({ type => 'http.response.body', body => $chunk, more => 1 });
    await $send->({ type => 'http.fullflush' }) if $supports_fullflush;

The extension mechanism is described in L<PAGI::Spec::Extensions>.

=head2 Inspecting the TLS connection

I<Example: F<examples/08-tls-introspection>>

When the connection is over TLS and the server supports the extension,
C<< $scope->{extensions}{tls} >> carries the connection's security metadata:

    my $tls = $scope->{extensions}{tls};
    if ($tls) {
        # $tls->{tls_version}, $tls->{cipher_suite},
        # $tls->{client_cert_name}, $tls->{client_cert_chain}, ...
    }

The key is absent for cleartext connections. See L<PAGI::Spec::Tls> for the
full set of fields.

=head1 PUTTING IT TOGETHER

=head2 A real-time job runner

I<Example: F<examples/11-job-runner>>

The capstone example combines all three application protocols in one app
sharing a single job queue: a REST API over B<HTTP> to create and cancel jobs,
per-job progress over B<SSE>, and a live queue dashboard over B<WebSocket>. It
is the most complete demonstration of raw PAGI.

Note: it drives C<IO::Async> timers directly, so it runs only under an
IO::Async-based server such as PAGI::Server -- see its F<README.md> for how it
could be made loop-agnostic with L<Future::IO>.

=head1 SEE ALSO

=over

=item *

L<PAGI::Tutorial> - the protocol taught as a linear path

=item *

L<PAGI> - the specification overview and ecosystem map

=item *

L<PAGI::Spec> - the formal specification

=back

=head1 AUTHOR

John Napiorkowski E<lt>jjnapiork@cpan.orgE<gt>

=head1 COPYRIGHT AND LICENSE

This software is licensed under the same terms as Perl itself.

=cut
