=encoding UTF-8

=head1 NAME

PAGI::Spec::Extensions - The PAGI server extension mechanism

=head1 Extensions

The PAGI specification provides for server-specific extensions to be used
outside of the core PAGI specification. This document records the extension
mechanism and shared extensions so servers and applications can interoperate
without private agreements.

Each extension is advertised by the server and may add keys to the connection
scope and define new event types. The L<TLS extension|PAGI::Spec::Tls> is a
fully specified example with its own document.

=head2 Declaring Extensions

=over

=item -

Servers advertise extensions in C<< scope->{extensions} >>. Each key must be a
lower-case identifier (e.g., C<fullflush>, C<tls>).

=item -

Extension values are hashrefs whose contents are defined by the extension
author. Use permitted data types from the core spec.

=item -

Applications must check for the presence of an extension before sending any
extension-specific events.

=back

When contributing a new extension, document it with:

=over

=item 1.

B<Name & Purpose> -- what problem it solves.

=item 2.

B<Scope Additions> -- keys added to C<< scope->{extensions}{$name} >> or other
metadata.

=item 3.

B<Events> -- new C<type> values that may flow through C<$send>/C<$receive>.

=item 4.

B<Compatibility> -- how clients should behave if the server omits the
extension.

=back

=head2 Example: C<fullflush>

Some HTTP servers expose a C<fullflush> capability that immediately flushes
buffered bytes to the client (useful for server-sent events or debugging).

=over

=item -

B<Scope>: servers set C<< scope->{extensions}{fullflush} = {} >> to indicate
support.

=item -

B<Event>: applications may send C<< { type => 'http.fullflush' } >> to force a
flush. Servers that do not advertise the extension must reject the event with
an error.

=back

Additional extensions (tracing hooks, background task controls, etc.) should
follow the same pattern.

=head1 SEE ALSO

=over

=item -

L<PAGI::Spec> -- the base specification

=item -

L<PAGI::Spec::Tls> -- the TLS extension, a fully specified example

=back

=cut
